---
layout: post
title: "After 64 Years: New World Blindfold Record Set by Marc Lang Playing 46 Games at Once"
date: 2011-12-16
author: Eliot Hearst
excerpt: "In 1947 GM Miguel Najdorf played 45 games simultaneously in São Paulo, Brazil. Until a few weeks ago, since 1947 only one player had played as many as 35 blindfold games at once under well-controlled conditions. That successful master was Marc Lang of Günzburg, Germany, who handled 35 opponents in November of 2010..."
---

***December 16, 2011*** • **By Eliot Hearst**

In 1947 GM Miguel Najdorf, while sitting in an isolated room, played 45 games simultaneously in São Paulo, Brazil. In another room his opponents sat with regular boards and pieces in front of them, and their and Najdorf's moves were transmitted to each other via standard chess notation using a microphone. This performance exceeded his own previous world record of 40, set in 1943 in Rosario, Argentina. Until a few weeks ago, since 1947 only one player had played as many as 35 blindfold games at once under well-controlled conditions. That successful master was Marc Lang of Günzburg, Germany, who handled 35 opponents in November of 2010, surpassing blindfold champion George Koltanowski's still-existing European and pre-Najdorf world record of 34 simultaneous games set in Edinburgh in 1937 (in 2009 Lang had set a new German record of 23). Lang's only remaining goal was to exceed Najdorf's 45 games and thereby gain the world record. For the past year he has been preparing to do just that, which he accomplished by playing 46 opponents on November 26-27, 2011.

It is remarkable that Lang is only a FIDE master, with an ELO rating around 2300. Except for Koltanowski (who did achieve an International Master's rating in 1950 and was later awarded an honorary Grandmaster title by FIDE in 1988), the greatest simultaneous blindfold players of the past were top world-class tournament and match players like Harry Pillsbury, Alexander Alekhine, Richard Réti, and Najdorf. Lang's ELO rating places him behind many hundreds of players of today who have gained International Master or Grandmaster titles and won major tourneys. The question remains whether Lang could have reached a much higher ELO rating had he not devoted himself to his computer business and family and rarely played in regular tourneys, or whether possession of excellent memory skills, a fairly high level of chess mastery, and strong motivation are about all you need to become a world blindfold champion.

Lang's recent record-breaking performance has been widely covered in media around the world (just google "marc lang blindfold chess" for numerous reports, photos, films, and a place where all 46 games can be found!). Furthermore, over the past two and a half years I have written four blogs on this website about Lang's progression from 15 to 23 to 35 simultaneous blindfold games. And he set a new world record for consecutive blindfold rapid games in July of this year, meeting 60 players successively and thus eclipsing Koltanowski's prior world record of 56. Readers are referred to these previous blogs for additional information about Lang's memory systems, computerized control of move transmission, delightful personality, preparation for his displays, and family life. Now I will concentrate fairly briefly on his latest and most important achievement, without much repetition of material provided in my previous writings about him.

## The Exhibition Details

In his 46-board display Lang sat in the same room as his opponents, with his back to most of them, but he could not see any of the actual positions they had in front of them because there was a barrier in front of all 46 boards. He transmitted his moves by typing them in algebraic notation on a computer monitor and receiving, from the referee, his opponent's moves. Only his or his opponent's most recent move was visible on the monitor. Since he had been criticized (unfairly, I think) for clicking on an empty computer diagram in some previous exhibitions to indicate the squares from which and to which a piece was being moved (actually the method used in the Amber grandmaster blindfold tourneys), this time he had no empty board anywhere on the computer monitor.

His simultaneous blindfold world record display was held in Sontheim an der Brenz, Germany, which is about halfway between Stuttgart and Munich. The exhibition took a little more than 21 hours. Of the 46 games he scored 34½ points, a very good winning percentage of 75% (+25, =19, -2). Losing only two games out of 46 is quite incredible. His opponents' USCF ratings ranged from about 1200 to 2300, with their average rating being around 1600. About 2/3 of the players had ratings below 1900.

## Analysis and Comparison

Another comparison of interest is the average number of moves that games lasted in the most recent world record achievements. I calculated that number to be 18 in Koltanowski's 1937 display, 26 in Najdorf's 1947 exhibition, 24 in Lang's 35-boarder in 2010, and 23 in his recent 46-boarder. Thus, if anyone, Koltanowski seems to be the outlier here. The critics who have argued that Lang played too many short games cannot use these numbers to support their arguments. However, it is true that Lang had a considerably higher percentage of draws (41%) in his recent 46-boarder than Koltanowski (29%) and Najdorf (only 9%!). Still, Lang's draws included only 6 in fewer than 20 moves, whereas Koltanowski had 9 such draws, and Najdorf none.

In my estimation Lang fully deserves to be recognized as the new world-record holder in simultaneous blindfold chess. For centuries the virtually universal criterion for that title has been the total number of games played, a criterion he has definitely met. In our book we note in numerous places that other criteria such as the strength of the opposition, the quality of the exhibitor's play, his reluctance to accept early draws, winning percentage, etc., might also be considered. But many of these other criteria involve rather subjective judgments, although now and in the future objective national or ELO ratings should enable a good measure of the strength of the opposition.

No chess expert would consider Lang to have played more strongly blindfolded than Alekhine and Najdorf, but I judge Lang's blindfold play to be superior to Koltanowski's. Lang himself has said that Najdorf was obviously a stronger regular and blindfold player than he is and that Najdorf's opposition in his 1947 record-setting display was probably stronger than Lang's own in 2011. This is not just modesty, but the truth. Nevertheless, Lang has played more simultaneous blindfold games at once than anyone else and that makes him the new record-holder.

Lang fortunately had financial sponsors who allowed him to take off time from his computer business for months to prepare for the world record attempt. He is 41, married with two children. Perhaps it is fitting for me to end the text of this blog by quoting what his wife Anne (who is an English teacher in Günzburg) had to say after the exhibition ended: "The hundredweight tension of recent weeks and months falls away for me abruptly and gives way to a great sense of happiness. The efforts and sacrifices of the past half-year were not in vain. Marc has actually done it!"
